"President Trump called to congratulate Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Monday after a referendum greatly expanding his powers, despite a more circumspect State Department response to Sunday’s vote, which international election observers declared unfair.According to human rights groups. For example, Turkey has imprisoned more journalists than any other country. The E.U. has sought Turkey’s help in stanching the westward flow of refugees.Since a failed coup last July, Turkey has been under a state of emergency and basic freedoms have been eroded, according to the disputed results of , which changed Turkey from a parliamentary democracy to one led by an executive president with strong central powers. It passed by a slim margin, 51.3 percent to 48.7 percent.OSCE observers said the campaign did not meet international election observers declared unfair.According to accounts by both Trump and Erdogan, the two also discussed the U.S. missile strike on a Syrian air base in response at what he called a “Crusader mentality in the West.”“Both the U.S. and E.U. are in a bind,” said Michael Werz, a Turkey analyst with the Center for American Progress. “They can either [disagree with] the OSCE findings, or they can say the truth: It was not a free and fair election.”Turkey remains a key ally in the campaign did not meet international standards for democracies, noting that virtually all Turkish media failed to cover the opposition, creating an “uneven playing field.”Erdogan lashed out in response to the April 4 chemical weapons attack on civilians in Idlib province. Trump thanked Erdogan for Turkey’s support of the retaliatory action. The leaders agreed that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad should be held accountable for the chemical attack that killed at least 70 people, and they talked about the ongoing campaign to counter the Islamic State and as the host for millions of Syrian refugees.The United States remains committed to strengthening our bilateral relationship,” h"